Let us now turn our attention to the All-pairs
Shortest Paths problems, where we try to find
the paths, shortest paths between every pair
of vertices in a graph.
So, recall that we are working with weighted
graphs, we allow negative edge weights, but
not negative cycles, because with negative
cycles our shortest path is not well defined,
with negative weights, it is well defined.
We saw that the Bellman-Ford algorithm allows
us to generalize Dijsktra's algorithm and
compute single source shortest paths in weighted
graphs with negative weight, but without negative
cycles.
So, now, we want to further generalize this
and compute not just the shortest paths from
a single source, but the shortest path between
every pair of vertices. So, as we explained
at the beginning an example would be, if you
trying to run a travel website or an airline
website and somebody wants to find the minimum
cost or the minimum time flight or train between
any pair of sides.
So, you made the following observation of
shortest paths that the shortest path even
in the presence of negative weights will never
loop, because we can always remove the loop
without increasing the length of the path.
So, therefore a shortest path never visits
the same vertex twice and has length at most
n minus 1. So, we exploited this algorithm
in one way for Bellman-Ford and we will find
that we can use it now for an inductive algorithm
for all pairs shortest path. So, we will come
up with an inductive solution of how to build
up the shortest paths.
So, we are basically going to build up shortest
path in terms of vaguely their length, but
most specifically what vertices we allowed
in between. So, the simplest shortest path
you can imagine in a pair of vertices it is
just a single edge. So, we have single edge
and this happens to be the shortest path,
then you are in good shape. But, in general
this may not be the shortest path, because
even if there is such an edge, there may be
a way, because of negative, because of edge
way, even because of negative edge ways are
reaching from i to j by our longer path of
edges, but with a shorter overall cost.
But, what we do know, because of the characterization
of shortest path is that this path from i
to j goes through some intermediate vertices
all of which are different from each other,
no vertex is visited twice. And secondly,
none of these vertices either i or j, there
is no point in coming back to i and then going
to j, so there is no loop anywhere in this
path. So, what we will do for this inductive
thing is to restrict, what can happen in between
i and j, what are the vertices that are allowed
and we will gradually increase the set. If
we allow any vertices, then of course, we
will get arbitrary shortest paths.
So, recall that vertices are numbered 1 to
n, so we will compute a quantity W k of i
j to be the weight of the shortest path from
i to j, where we restrict the vertices that
can be used go from i to j to be between 1
and k. In other words, we have this set of
vertices V, so we cut it off saying we have
1 to k and we have k plus 1 to n, we say that
only these vertices can be used in the path.
Now, the end points themselves may not be,
need not be, but at the point is that in the
end point is outside, then it can still, so
I could have a 1 vertex here and then it could
have a path which go like this and then come
back. So, only says is that the intermediate
vertices, so when I start with i and go to
j, what happens in between lies in this set
1 to k. So, in particular if k is 0, because
our numbering is 1 to n, it says that the
vertices that can appear cannot be include
1.
So, in other words, if I have W 0, then it
says all of the vertices 1 to n cannot appear
on the paths, so the only way that we can
have such a shortest paths is to the direct
edge. So, W 0, the base case of this inductive
definition says that the shortest paths between
i and j which exclude all vertices from 1
to n are of the form edges between i and j.
So, now since this is an inductive definition,
what we have to say is, supposing we know
the shortest paths which use 1 to k minus
1, then how do I compute the shortest paths
that use 1 to k. So, we know among all the
paths which use at most 1 to k minus 1, what
is the shortest path from i to j, how do we
now compute, if we allow vertex k also to
be used, how do you compute, what would be
the shortest path from i to j.
So, there are two cases, the first case is
this is an extra vertex k not useful, the
shortest path even if I include k does not
use vertex k, it is enough to use 1 to k minus
1. In this case the shortest distance from
W i to j using 1 to k is the same as the shortest
distance from i to j using k minus 1. So,
I can say W k of i j is the same as W k minus
1 i j. On the other hand, it could be that
using k does give us some non trivial improvement.
So, we have now some path which goes from
i to j and on the way it visits k. So, if
it visits k on the way, then we can break
it up as a path from i to k and a path from
k to j. But, notice that we have already said
that this vertex k or any vertex for that
matter which appears in this path, if it is
the shortest path appears only once. So, if
cut k appears here, there is no k between
i and k and there is no k between k and j.
This means that I have a path from i to k
already which goes through 1 to k minus 1
and I have a path from k to j already which
goes 1 to k minus 1 and I am combining these
two.
So, I can break up the path, as a path from
i to k and the path k to j, each of which
uses only 1 to k minus 1. And what is the
cost of that path, well, we inductively know
that we have the cost of the best path from
i to k using only 1 to k minus 1 inductive
k minus 1, you also have the best path from
k to j in our matrix W k minus 1. So, if I
add these two, this must be the path best
way of going i or k.
So, combing the cases, we say that either
we do not use k in which case, we take the
value of the old matrix or you do use k and
which case we combine two entries going via
k in the old matrix, we will take the smaller
of these two. So, which one of these smaller
will be the correct value of the shortest
distance from i to j going through 1 to k.
So, this gives us an immediate algorithm which
is called the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. So,
we start off with matrix representing the
function W 0. So, W 0 has entries which are
exactly the edge weight, so there is an edge
from i to j, the W 0 i to j says that direct
path of that weight. Because, remember that
W 0 cannot go through any intermediate paths
and if there is no edge, since I cannot go
through any intermediate vertex, W 0 i j must
be infinity.
Now, for k in 1 to n, I basically repeat this
n times, I first allow 1 to be use. So, I
compute W 1 and W 0. And how do I do that,
I use the update to insert earlier that will
take the minimum of what you already have
plus the possibility going through the newly
introduced vertex, then I will allow 1 and
2, then I will allow 1, 2 and 3. And obviously,
if I allow 1, 2, 3 up to n I allow all the
vertices to appear in between, W n will now
have the shortest paths with no constraints.
So, I need to do these update exactly n times,
so that after n times I capture the shortest
way paths which include any arbitrary combination
of vertices on the path.
So, the actual code is again like Bellman-Ford
extremely straight forward. You just have
first initialization which sets every way
to infinity and then updates the non trivial
weights for those edges which are in the graphs.
So, we have keeping track of this function
W 0 of i j by a three dimensional matrix,
so i and j represent the two vertices and
the 0 represents the iteration number.
So, initially W 0 of i j is either the weight
of i j, if there is an edge or it is infinity
and that is what these first two steps are
doing. And now, we do this ends n times, we
do this iteration, that is we update all the
W i j's at level k to be the minimum of the
W i j's at level k minus 1 or the sum of the
root. So, implicitly here should have been
for . So, this is for i n, for i equal to
1 to n, for j equal to 1 to n.
So, we have this update rule and we do these
blindly n times and n we claim that the matrix
W in the entry k has got the correct shortest
paths for all pairs of vertices.
So, let us look at the same example that we
saw for Bellman-Ford. So, initially we assign
to each, so W 0 has the edge weight. So, we
have an adjacency matrix like representation
in which for instance, we say 1 to 2 there
is an edge of weight 10, 7 to 6, there is
an edge of weight minus 1 and so on. So, we
just duplicate all of these edges in the matrix
and everything else is left at infinity.
Now, from W 0, we go to W 1 by considering
all new paths that we can find by going from
1, but now notice that this nothing that is
coming into 1. So, this is signified to in
fact, that the column 1 has infinity, no edge
goes into 1. So, no other vertex can use the
fact that 1 is connected to 2 and 8. So, if
you update using update rule, you find that
the W 1 is actually equal to W 0 nothing changes,
because allowing 1 to be use in between two
vertices does not help us.
It is not in between any two vertices, I cannot
go from anywhere to 1 and then from 1 to that
vertex. On the other hand, if I can now include
2, then I can do interesting things, I can
go for example, from 1 to 2 to 6 and I can
go from 7 to 1 to 6. So, align 2 and 1 as
an intermediate vertex, so 1 does not help
right now, but allowing 2 gives me something.
So, if I now look at W 1, I do not need W
0 anymore, whenever W 1, then I will whether
said be able to explore paths through 2. So,
in particular 2 goes to 6, anything pointing
into 2, so 7 to 2 to 6, 3 to 2 to 6 and 1
to 2 to 6, these three entries will get updated.
So, 1 to 2 to 6, so I get a new entry 12,
3 to 2 to 6, so I get new entry 3 and 7 to
2 to 6, I get minus 4 plus 2 minus 3. Now
from W 2, likewise I will compute W 3, again
compute W 3 will come back to this later,
I do not need W 1, I only need W 2. So, I
can throw way W 1 from now, I am just look
at W 2. So, now I am allowing myself to use
1, 2, 3, so I will look for things at go throw
3.
So, for instance now through 3, I can go from
6 to 4, for example, so I will get entries
of that form. So, I can go from 6 to 4 with
new thing, I can also go from 6 to 2. So,
now, I have a new way are going from 6 to
2, so that also get separated. And interestingly,
I also discovered that, there is now our path
from 6 to 6, because earlier I did not know
that, but now that, I am allow to go throw
both 2 and 3, I can go from 6 to 6, I have
discovered this loop, which has a positive
weight.
If did not have a positive weight viewer in
trouble, because this is did not have a well
defined solution and so on. So, you can just
keep on doing this, we will not update up
to W, if you now go all the way and do up
to W 8, then after you allow everything from
1 to 8 to be an intermediate thing, this matrix
will actually compute all pair shortest path
between any i j.
So, this algorithm it is very easy to see
that the complexity is order n cube, because
you have n iteration and an each iteration
we are updating the entire matrix which has
n square entries. This is not much you can
do to improve this, because it is an adjacency
matrix base algorithm, we cannot move to list,
we do not have to compute any minimum maximum.
So, nothing much you can do it is, it is n
cube algorithm, notice that, it is sort of
solves, as it trivial case, the Bellman-Ford,
because once you computed all pairs, so this
generalizes as the solution Bellman-Ford.
Because, in particular, if you now want all
the shortest path from a given s, everything
you just have to look up that particular row
in the Floyd Warshall matrix.
You look at the row s and all the entries
with say the shortest path from s, but remember
that in that particular case, if I only wanted
from s Bellman-Ford with clever adjacency
list representation would take order m n,
but it is here this will require order n cube.
So, this is the generalize Bellman-Ford instance,
you get same answer that you would have call
from Bellman-Ford and more.
But, you are always spending n cube time,
there is if you had very few edges in your
graph which is typically the case Bellman-Ford
in more efficient. So, if you are using, if
you only want to do single source shortest
path, you should not typically jump directly
to Floyd Warshall, you should probably do
Bellman-Ford instant. About space complexity,
so we said that we are going to represent
each W 0, W 1 etcetera is one coordinate.
So, we have basically have n times, n times
n, because we have n times n is the actual
matrix, we have n of these matrixes, because
we have level 0, level 1 upto level k - level
n. But, we saw that in our work out example,
that when you need to compute the level 1,
we only need level 0, then we can throw a
level 0. When, we need to compute level 2,
you need only level 1.
So, in some sense, you can keep only 2 copies
and keep switching back and fold, you over
write the zeroth level as second level, you
over write the first level as third level
and so on. So, we need only 2 slices of l,
call it of this three dimensional matrix at
a time. So, you can just keep oscillating
between these 2 slices overall here 2 n squared
space. So, we known normally worry about space.
But, just an observation that in this particular
thing, you do not really need to have the
n cubed array, you can have 2 n squared array
or a n squared array with that two indices.
And keep oscillating between the 2 and get
the same effect, because you only need one
copy to compute the other copy.
So, let us conclude this discussion in some
historical remarks. So, Floyd Warshall as
you can see from the hyphenation, as the hybrid
name for this algorithm and actually there
are two distinct algorithms which comprise
it, which have a very similar structure. So,
the original algorithm which are proposed
by Warshall is for what is called transitive
closure. So, transitive closure is exactly
the same as computing the path from edge relation.
So, supposing you have a relationship like
friend, so you know among a group of people,
who is a direct friend of whom, then you might
want to ask, who knows indirectly. So, I know
somebody indirectly, if I have a friend, who
knows that person or if I have a friend who
as the friend knows that person and so on.
So, knowing somebody indirectly is that transitive
closure of the friend relation. In the same
way in a general, I mean, so in every graph,
if you put the friend, whatever relation,
we want as the edge relation, the transitive
closure is the path relation.
So, you have an adjacency matrix which represents
the edges, you want to compute a path matrix
which represents the paths, which are the
pairs of vertices computed by which are connected
by paths. And so, Warshall describe the similar
algorithm, what we wrote now and we will just
do it in a little detail in the next couple
of slides to do this compute P from A and
what Floyd is observed was you can adapted
as same algorithm. So, if Warshall's algorithm,
we only checking is there of path and Floyds
algorithm says that, you can actually adapt
it to compute shortest paths.
So, the idea is very similar to what you have
seen for let us go through it quickly. So,
we have an adjacency matrix A, which tells
as the edges A i j is 1, if there is an edge
and we want a path matrix P i j is a 1, there
is a path from i to j. So, we will again compute
iteratively this quantity P k i j, it says
that there is the path and this path uses
only the vertices 1 to k.
So, k plus 1 to n cannot appear in the path
and again the end points are not included.
So, i and j are arbitrary, it is what is a
between i and j which is restricted by this
super script k. So, between i and j, you can
only seen things from 1 to k. So, as before
if you do P 0, it says nothing can appear,
because you could have everything from 1 to
n, therefore, P 0 is just the adjacency matrix.
So, now we have a very similar update rule,
so if I know the paths which can be discovered
using 1 to k minus 1, what are the paths I
can discover using 1 to k. So, if there is
a path already without using k, then I can
just keep that path. So, we could either have
that P k, I so remember now is there a path
is not the path. So, this is like an adjacency
matrix, there is no weight, it was the 0,
1 matrix or a true false matrix.
So, initially the adjacency matrix has 1 or
true, whenever there is an edge, false whenever
there is no edge. So, if I already got an
entry true with k minus 1, then I can keep
it. The other hand, maybe I do not have an
entry true, after go via k, but once again
that needs there is a path from i to k and
there is a path from k to j and here I use
only k minus 1 and here I use only k minus
1, because k needs to appear only once.
Just like in a shortest path, if I am just
looking for some connectivity, then I do not
gain anything by going back from k to k, because
I can this remove that i and j will remain
connected. So, I need to only look for paths
which have one copy of every vertex along
them. So, therefore, I can assume there is
a path from i to k, which does not use anything
outside 1 to k minus 1, likewise from k to
j.
So, here now instead of min and plus operations,
now become or and and, either I want to path
from i to k and path from k to j or I want
to existing path from i to j, which never
use k at all. So, I have this AND operation
for combining these two existing paths should
P and then, I have an OR operation which combines
a case 1. So, earlier we had W k minus 1,
i j and then, we add this W k minus 1, i k
plus W k minus 1, k j and we took the min
on this.
So, here instead of this plus, we are using
AND and instead of using min, we are using
OR, you can see that the algorithm is not
exactly the same. But, it is very similar,
so this was the algorithm proposed by Warshall.
So, you initialize everything to false and
then, again you should P for i is equal to
1 to n for j is equal to 1 to n. So, you initialize
all the paths to false, then you set explicitly
that is the zeroth level path at true, if
there is an edge. And then, you keep updating
the kth level path by either saying that there
was already k minus 1 level path or I can
find 2 k minus 1 level path via an intermediate
level k in intermediate vertex k.
So, it is a very similar thing, we just have
just these operations of OR and AND, instead
of min and plus. And then, Warshall's algorithm
for use transitive closure and Floyd generalized
it would shortest paths and these work in
the presence of negative edges, it does not
matter, Floyds algorithm does not care with
the edges are negative or positive. So, long
as there are no negative cycles.